# An ancient, conserved gene regulatory network led to the rise of oral venom systems
## Agneesh Barua and Alexander S. Mikheyev

### Supplementary material that includes code, original figures, and other material can be found [here](https://agneeshbarua.github.io/Metavenom/) 

### Other data and code can be found in their respective repositories. 

### Abstract
Oral venom systems evolved multiple times in numerous animals enabling exploitation of  unique predatory niches. Yet how and when they evolved remains poorly understood. Up to now, most research on venom evolution has focussed strictly on the toxins. However, using toxins present in modern day animals to trace the origin of the venom system is difficult, since they tend to evolve rapidly, show complex patterns of expression, and were incorporated into the venom arsenal relatively recently. Here we focus on gene regulatory networks associated with the production of toxins in snakes, rather than the toxins themselves. We found that overall venom gland gene expression was surprisingly well conserved when compared to salivary glands of other amniotes. We characterised the ‘meta-venom’, a network of approximately 3000 non-secreted genes that are strongly co-expressed with the toxins, and are primarily involved in protein folding and modification.  Conserved across amniotes, this network was co-opted for venom evolution by exaptation of existing members and the recruitment of new toxin genes. For instance, starting from this common molecular foundation, Heloderma lizards, shrews, and solenodon, evolved venoms in parallel by overexpression of kallikreins, which were common in ancestral saliva and induce vasodilation when injected, causing circulatory shock. Derived venoms, such as those of snakes, incorporated novel toxins, though still rely on hypotension for prey immobilization. These similarities suggest repeated co-option of shared molecular machinery for the evolution of oral venom in mammals and reptiles, blurring the line between truly venomous animals and their ancestors.
